Add additional docs (FAQs and motivation) (#10)
unitaryfoundation/jeff: docs/faqs.md

# Frequently asked questions

> ## Is *Jeff* meant to be an intermediate format that quantum software packages to manipulate?

Author: potentially an unpopular opinion, but I'm not sure it matters too much 😅 The same way you see json and JSON interchangeably. But I saw that others have been using *Jeff*, so have been aiming to be consistent there

> ## Is *Jeff* meant to be an intermediate format that quantum software packages to manipulate?

Reviewer: All the marketing used _jeff_ - also don't care too much

> ## Is *Jeff* meant to be an intermediate format that quantum software packages to manipulate?

Reviewer 2: > All the marketing used _jeff_ - also don't care too much

That's what I've been using in any formatted text since that was the only vote received at the time^^ I'm still not sure what I like better though

No. *Jeff* is designed purely to be an exchange format. It is expected that consuming software
frameworks map **Jeff** input to their own intermediate representations for internal manipulation.

## Why design a non-human readable format?

The main goal is to design an *efficient* exchange format that best represents the information
needed for quantum optimizations by compilers, and the most efficient approach is a binary,
non-human readable format.

> [Protocol buffers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers) (and derivatives) are a binary

Author: ```suggestion
[Protocol buffers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers) (and derivatives such as Cap'n Proto) are a binary
```

gates to be applied. This structure results in a *compressed* program representation compared to
the unrolled list of quantum instructions, so ideally we should design compiler passes to act on
such compressed representations.

In extreme cases, if the program representation does not increase in size as the program scales,
[compilation may be constant-time](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12449).

There is still a lot of work to do when it comes to compiling structured programs:

- Often, porting known state-of-the-art compilation techniques to apply to structured programs can
  be highly non-trivial.

- There is tension between maximal optimization and compact program representation. There are still
  a lot of questions we need to consider and resolve when it comes to compiling dynamic, structured
  programs. For example, the more compact the program representation (which is great for
  compilation scalability!) the less information we potentially have up-front to maximally optimize
  programs at compile time. How do we deal with such scenarios?

## How did you decide what goes into the schema?

## Why Cap'n Proto?

## Isn't this just *another* format standard?

> ## Why not format X?

Author: yep!

### Why not OpenQASM2?

[OpenQASM2](https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03429) has become the de-facto interchange format in quantum software, but the biggest drawback
has been the lack of program structure — something that we *need* to be a first-class citizen in a
compiler exchange format.

An exchange format that makes it easy to incorporate structure will also allow the field to consider
compilation of structured programs by default.

### Why not OpenQASM3?

[OpenQASM3](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14722) brings program structure to OpenQASM2, however has not yet seen adoption or tooling
maturity in the ecosystem to the extent as OpenQASM2. In addition, OpenQASM3 maintains a focus on
human readability, and is not designed first and foremost for quantum optimization.

Moreover, OpenQASM3 has a few quirks that limit its general usability as a compiler exchange
format:

- Lack of extensibility without evolving the specification (a `#pragma` directive is provided, but
  does not easily allow for including general structured information).

- You can only index into arrays using compile-time constants, not dynamic values that may only been
  known at runtime.

> - Registers (TODO).

Author: I have it in my notes for QASM3, but I'm not sure either. I'll remove it for now.

> - Registers (TODO).

Author: ```suggestion
```

to it depending on the LLVM toolchain — a massive software project that has non-trivial
compatibility concerns, installation, and learning overhead.

### Why not MLIR?

[MLIR (Multi-Level Intermediate Representation)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MLIR_(software)) is a framework that exists on top of QIR/LLVM, and
permits multiple high-level 'dialects' (IRs tailored to specific domains) to coexist, making it the
framework of choice for most QIR/LLVM compiler stacks such as CUDA-Q and Catalyst.

However, something to note is that MLIR is a *framework*, not a defined format — different compilers
define *multiple* internal/custom dialects that altogether are used to represent a quantum program.
At the moment, there is no clear *shared* set of quantum MLIR dialects that make sense to use more
broadly.

Finally, as per QIR the software tooling remains a big issue. Not all compilers are using LLVM,
which MLIR depends upon, and it introduces the same significant barrier to entry as discussed above
with QIR.

### Why not HUGR?

[HUGR](https://github.com/CQCL/hugr) is a hybrid quantum-classical program representation introduced by Quantinuum and used by the

> [TKET](https://github.com/CQCL/tket) and [Guppy](https://github.com/CQCL/guppylang) software libraries. While satisfying a lot of our intended criteria, HUGR itself was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TKET](https://github.com/CQCL/tket2) and [Guppy](https://github.com/CQCL/guppylang) software libraries. While satisfying a lot of our intended criteria, HUGR itself was
```

we have naming problems...

not designed to be an exchange format, and instead is used as an internal intermediate
representation. In addition, HUGR contains advanced features such as type structure that has a high
barrier to entry.

> 

Author: any other questions I am missing?

gates to be applied. This structure results in a *compressed* program representation compared to
the unrolled list of quantum instructions, so ideally we should design compiler passes to act on
such compressed representations.

In extreme cases, if the program representation does not increase in size as the program scales,
[compilation may be constant-time](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12449).

There is still a lot of work to do when it comes to compiling structured programs:

- Often, porting known state-of-the-art compilation techniques to apply to structured programs can
  be highly non-trivial.

- There is tension between maximal optimization and compact program representation. There are still
  a lot of questions we need to consider and resolve when it comes to compiling dynamic, structured
  programs. For example, the more compact the program representation (which is great for
  compilation scalability!) the less information we potentially have up-front to maximally optimize
  programs at compile time. How do we deal with such scenarios?

## How did you decide what goes into the schema?

## Why Cap'n Proto?

> Jeff is a machine-first exchange format, so we looked at existing succh projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Jeff is a machine-first exchange format.
```

Either this, or just fix the "succh->such"

the unrolled list of quantum instructions, which is both more efficient to compile, and may even
allow for optimizations which may not be possible when the structure is lost/the program is flattened.

So ideally, we should design compiler passes to act on
such compressed representations! In extreme cases, if the program representation does not increase in size as the program scales,
[compilation may be constant-time](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12449).

There is still a lot of work to do when it comes to compiling structured programs:

- Often, porting known state-of-the-art compilation techniques to apply to structured programs can
  be highly non-trivial.

- There is tension between maximal optimization and compact program representation. There are still
  a lot of questions we need to consider and resolve when it comes to compiling dynamic, structured
  programs. For example, the more compact the program representation (which is great for
  compilation scalability!) the less information we potentially have up-front to maximally optimize
  programs at compile time. How do we deal with such scenarios?

## How did you decide what goes into the schema?

## Why Cap'n Proto?

> Jeff is a machine-first exchange format, so we looked at existing succh projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While we could have gone with something like JSON or MessagePack - we wanted first-class
```

While we could have gone with something like JSON or Messagepack - we wanted first-class
schema support, efficient binary encoding and tooling in many languages.

The [Protocol buffer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers) family of projects
fits this description well. This includes the original 

> [Protocol buffer](https://protobuf.dev/) project but also more modern evolutions

Reviewer 3: There's a lot more use of "protocol buffers" here than needed. Why not just mention "data serialization formats", or something generic, before introducing the current implementation using capnproto.

I'd reframe this as:
* We are using Capnproto
* Reasons we are using capnproto
* Alternative models to capnproto (the other models can be mentioned here)

# Frequently asked questions

## Is *Jeff* meant to be an intermediate format that quantum software packages manipulate?

No. *Jeff* is designed purely to be an exchange format. It is expected that software
frameworks map **Jeff** input to their own intermediate representations for internal manipulation.

## Why design a non-human readable format?

The main goal is to design an *efficient* exchange format that best represents the information
needed for quantum optimizations by compilers, and the most efficient approach is a binary,
non-human readable format.

[Protocol buffers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers) (and derivatives such as Cap'n Proto) are a binary

> data format initially developed by Google that has been used for similar problems across the
> classical domain, and was chosen for *Jeff*.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
data format initially developed by Google that have been used for similar problems across the
classical domain, and were chosen for *Jeff*.
```

Human-readable formats have been quite common in the quantum space thus far, but in addition we see
two major reason why they might make less sense going forward:

- We are only just beginning to scale quantum software to FTQC regimes, so have not experienced the
  performance issues associated with (re-)parsing human readable formats, compared to formats
  designed for machine-readability.

- the tooling around IR and exchange formats has not been mature enough, and the best way to
  debug/inspect has often been to simply open and read the file. Improving tooling for debugging

>   and visualization should help rectify this.

Reviewer 4: Is the idea here that a debugging tool might also parse Jeff, and display some structured program representation?  Would that require either (a)  tools to be implemented by the individual compilers / providers, or (b) tools that allow visualization and/or debugging at a universal but more abstract level?

## Why do we need program structure?

There are two main reasons:

> - Because we *need* to (not all algorithmic primitives, an example being repeat-until-success, can

Reviewer 4: Minor point but the grammar of the response doesn't match with the question in the header

Reviewer 4: Ah it was this flow: "Why do we need program structure?" -> "Because we need to"

such compressed representations! In extreme cases, if the program representation does not increase in size as the program scales,
[compilation may be constant-time](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12449).

There is still a lot of work to do when it comes to compiling structured programs:

- Often, porting known state-of-the-art compilation techniques to apply to structured programs can
  be highly non-trivial.

- There is tension between maximal optimization and compact program representation. There are still
  a lot of questions we need to consider and resolve when it comes to compiling dynamic, structured
  programs. For example, the more compact the program representation (which is great for
  compilation scalability!) the less information we potentially have up-front to maximally optimize
  programs at compile time. How do we deal with such scenarios?

## How did you decide what goes into the schema?

## Why Cap'n Proto?

We use [Cap'n Proto](https://capnproto.org/) as our data serialization format for Jeff.

**Reasons for choosing Cap'n Proto:**
- Fast, efficient binary encoding
- Zero-copy deserialization for high performance
- Simple and expressive schema language

> - Robust tooling and support for key quantum programming languages (Python, C++, Rust)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Robust tooling and support for key quantum programming frameworks (Python, C++, Rust)
```

I don't think the compilers/frameworks are formal languages, but tbh I don't know enough to explain precisely where the line is drawn.

**Alternative serialization formats:**  
Other models considered include [Protocol Buffers](https://protobuf.dev/), [Flatbuffers](https://flatbuffers.dev/), [MessagePack](https://msgpack.org/), and JSON. While these formats offer similar features, Cap'n Proto provides the best combination of speed, schema support, and language integration for our needs.

## Isn't this just *another* format standard?

The danger of introducing new exchange formats or standards is that they themselves may slow down
development — perhaps because of a governance structure with too much process and/or stakeholders,
or simply because the format is too rigid and doesn't permit extensibility for new ideas.

This is something we wish to avoid — Jeff is *not* a standard we need all stakeholders to adopt, but
an exchange format localized to compilers, designed to
be easily extensible. Additional information for program representation and compilation can be added
directly, and will be taken into account by software frameworks that understand the direction.

> Further, development will happen out in the open, on GitHub.

Reviewer 4: I'm not convinced that open development alone will avoid the problems mentioned here. Is there a broader strategy to get _feedback_ from stakeholders and/or competing IRs, without binding them to use the format or requesting them to steer development?

As a side note... I've facilitated discussions at compilation workshops to try and determine what we need / don't need as part of a unified representation. These discussions never converge :sweat_smile: There is always something missing that someone wants. An important question to consider is, does there exist a _truly minimal_ set of requirements for an exchange format such that any (known) quantum algorithm can be compiled to Jeff from framework A, and faithfully loaded into framework B?

## Why not format X?

### Why not OpenQASM2?

[OpenQASM2](https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03429) has become the de-facto interchange format in quantum software, but the biggest drawback
has been the lack of program structure — something that we *need* to be a first-class citizen in a
compiler exchange format.

An exchange format that makes it easy to incorporate structure will also allow the field to consider
compilation of structured programs by default.

### Why not OpenQASM3?

[OpenQASM3](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14722) brings program structure to OpenQASM2, however has not yet seen adoption or tooling
maturity in the ecosystem to the extent as OpenQASM2. In addition, OpenQASM3 maintains a focus on

> human readability (requiring string generation and parsing), and is not designed first and foremost for quantum optimization.

Reviewer 2: I think the two main disadvantages should be placed in the bulleted list for better visibility. To me these are the reliance on parsing, and the linear arrangement of gates rather than an arrangement in a graph.

Author: https://github.com/unitaryfoundation/jeff/pull/10/files#r2312562198

- You can only index into arrays using compile-time constants, not dynamic values that may only been
  known at runtime.

- Registers (TODO).

### Why not QIR?

[QIR](https://www.qir-alliance.org/) was originally designed as a low-level, hardware-facing IR for optimization, for example using
the QIR Adapter Tool (QAT). However, QIR today is used less for quantum optimization as it is quite
low-level (missing a lot of the higher-level abstractions we would like to preserve during
compilation), and is predominantly used as a low-level interchange format between software
frameworks and hardware providers.

This can be seen by looking at the various software compilers built on top on the QIR stack such as
[CUDA-Q](https://github.com/nvidia/cuda-quantum) and [Catalyst](https://github.com/pennylaneai/catalyst) — rather than compiling QIR programs, they instead
optimize MLIR, a higher-level intermediate representation.

Furthermore, relying on QIR as a compilation exchange format introduces a big barrier to entry due
to it depending on the LLVM toolchain — a massive software project that has non-trivial
compatibility concerns, installation, and learning overhead.

### Why not MLIR?

> [MLIR (Multi-Level Intermediate Representation)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MLIR_(software)) is a framework that exists on top of QIR/LLVM, and

Reviewer 2: MLIR doesn't exist on top of QIR, you could argue it exists on top of LLVM (a lof of inspiration is taken from llvm, mlir uses a lot of core support libraries from llvm, and there is built-in lowering from standard mlir dialects to llvm ir), although even that is not necessarily a conceptual requirement for mlir (it can be used without going to llvm ir, or implemented without llvm libraries like in xdsl).

Author: ```suggestion
[MLIR (Multi-Level Intermediate Representation)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MLIR_(software)) is a framework that developed by the LLVM project, and
```

permits multiple high-level 'dialects' (IRs tailored to specific domains) to coexist, making it the

> framework of choice for most QIR/LLVM compiler stacks such as CUDA-Q and Catalyst.

Reviewer 2: I would not call Catalyst a QIR compiler stack, it doesn't have support for emitting something reasonably close to the QIR spec.

Author: ```suggestion
framework of choice for most LLVM compiler stacks such as CUDA-Q and Catalyst.
```

However, something to note is that MLIR is a *framework*, not a defined format — different compilers
define *multiple* internal/custom dialects that altogether are used to represent a quantum program.

> At the moment, there is no clear *shared* set of quantum MLIR dialects that make sense to use more

Reviewer 2: An additional point to mention is the difficulty in maintaining binary compatibility between different projects, even if they did share the same mlir dialect. The textual mlir format would avoid this though.

Author: https://github.com/unitaryfoundation/jeff/pull/10/files#r2312563136

> broadly.

Author: ```suggestion
broadly.

Further, even if projects do share the same MLIR dialect, an
additional difficulty would be maintaining binary compatibility
between different projects.
```
